[Music]
very good morning to you welcome to
breakfast with charlie state and louise
mentioned
our headlines today captain sir tom
remembered by those who are closest to
him
in his final months he wouldn't have
wanted us
to feel sorrow um
he just wouldn't and and look i'm my
father's daughter at the end of the day
and
and he always said when you're gone
you're gone and he has gone
and we had our lovely goodbyes
i don't feel cheated none of us feel
cheated
in their first interview since his death
his daughter and grandchildren talk to
this programme about protecting sir tom
from online abuse
his pride in his fundraising and his
legacy
in the years to come hospital leaders
warn the prime minister not to ease
lockdown
in england until services are less
stretched they say it may take another
six weeks good morning what is the
future of
hard cash with more people using
contactless payments
there are calls on the government to
protect access to coins and notes for
the most vulnerable
good morning back to their best in
budapest
a much needed win for liverpool in the
champions league
gives an elated jurgen klopp the
advantage
after a difficult few weeks for the club
after thousands respond to the case of
the mountain rescue volunteer badly
injured helping
two people who broke lockdown we look at
the courageous work of the teams
good morning today we've got a band of
rain moving west to east it will clear
most
but it will linger in southern areas
behind it sunshine and showers
and it's going to be another mild day
but a windy one i'll have all the
details
later in the programme
very good morning it's a wednesday the
17th of february our main story for you
the family of captain sir tom moore have
spoken
for the first time about his final days
before his death
two weeks ago the second world war
veteran had become a symbol of hope
and optimism during the pandemic after
he raised almost 33
million pounds for the nhs now sir tom's
daughter and grandchildren
have told breakfast about coping with
their loss their pride
in his achievements and the online abuse
they shielded him from this report from
john mcguire contains some flashing
images
to the outside world captain satomor was
a veteran
of the second world war a
record-breaking fundraiser
and an icon of our struggle with the
pandemic
but here at his family home he was first
and foremost
a father a father-in-law and a
grandfather
hannah good to see you thanks very much
for inviting us to talk to you
how are you feeling how's the how are
you and the family getting on thank you
for asking john i mean it's difficult
right we've we've lost a fifth you know
we were
five and and we've gone to a four and
that's really difficult to say
you know we've lost a a huge part of our
life you know
we've been together for 30 and he'd been
with us for over 13 years
and so it's the you know it's the
deafening silence that's the heart
that's the way i can describe it
he died in hospital two weeks ago
suffering pneumonia
and having tested positive for covid19
when he went into hospital we really all
believed he'd come back out
uh we thought they were a bit of the
oxygen would help and
that he would be robust enough the truth
is he just wasn't he was
he was old his final hours were spent
with his family at his bedside
something that hasn't always been
possible for many over the past
year in those in that last day we really
did have some
super moments together and you know we
put photographs up and
and he engaged with us and um it was
amazing
[Applause]
being thrust into the white heat of
public scrutiny has come with a very
modern virus
a curse the vitriol from a small
minority
on social media we really had to use our
our family resilience our emotional
resilience and we never told him
because i don't think he could ever have
understood it
i think it would have broken his heart
honestly if we said to him
you know people are hating us i couldn't
i couldn't tell him
because how do you rationalize to a
hundred year old man that
something so incredibly good can attract
such horror
his was a life most extra ordinary
i mean it's hard to really really hard
but the legacy is is hope and joy
isn't it and and i think that
the thing that i feel is that other
people are grieving too for him
and that's amazing in as much as he
touched all those people
and i don't want to pass on to them um
grief that's unrequited you know it's
okay it's okay i think to be sad
it's okay to grieve and we know that
you're grieving with us
but let's never lose sight of the fact
that for him this was
all about tomorrow's big day and being
hopeful
and no reason to sit and mourn for too
long
you know get on with it and make a good
job of it
[Laughter]
he couldn't have said it better himself
could he thanks for lending him to us
for the last 10 months well thank you
and there are of course many exciting
things to come and
and we look forward to sharing them with
you
it's lovely to hear that kind of note of
optimism there is absolutely isn't it as
the family reflects on how other people
have marked captain sir tom's death as
well and just let you know we will have
an extended interview with hannah and to
tom's grandchildren
here on breakfast around 10 past eight
this morning
the nhs is likely to remain at full
stretch for at least another six weeks
according to the body which represents
hospital
managers chris hopson the chief
executive of nhs providers has written
to the prime minister saying
case numbers are still too high to ease
lockdown
it comes as research from the think tank
reform suggests waiting lists for
non-urgent treatment in england
could hit 10 million by april as our
health editor hugh pim reports
the total waiting list for routine
operations such as hip and knee
replacements in england
has been rising steadily with hospitals
having to cope
with the surge in covid patient numbers
it went above 4.5 million in december
reform says that number understates the
scale of the problem
as last year there were nearly 6 million
fewer people than in 2019
referred by their gps for treatment if
that many patients
start returning to the system the think
tank argues and
is still limited the waiting list could
hit 10 million in england
by april nhs england said twice as many
non-urgent treatments were delivered
and three times as many diagnostic
checks carried out in the second coved
wave
compared with the first nhs providers
representing trusts in england
says restrictions should not be eased by
the government
until capacities return to levels where
hospitals can treat
all the patients they need to pim bbc
news
surge testing for the south african
variant of covid19 is being expanded in
several areas
in england the department of health and
social care says testing will be set up
in southampton
working and parts of norfolk where
positive cases of the variant have been
discovered
people in those areas should take a test
this week whether they are showing
symptoms
or not the un's top human rights body
says it will raise the
detention of princess latifah the
daughter of dubai's ruler with the
authorities
in the united arab emirates it's after
the princess accused her father
sheikh mohammed bin rashid al maktoum of
holding her hostage
in a series of secret videos obtained by
the bbc she describes
how she fears for her life the
government of dubai and the uae
said that latifah is safe in the care of
her family
vulnerable children must be at the heart
of the government's plans to build back
better after covid19
that's the message from england's
outgoing children's commissioner anne
longfield
who in her final speech will warn of the
long-term effects the pandemic
on the life chances of young people the
government said protecting vulnerable
children has always been a priority
over the past year the detention of
myanmar's leader by the country's
military has been called a violation of
human rights by prime minister boris
johnson
the lawyer for aung sang suchi told
reporters the ousted leader had received
further charges from the police
yesterday
protests against the coup are continuing
across the country despite attempts by
the military
to suppress them texas has been placed
into a state of emergency after
temperatures in some parts of the state
plummeted to their lowest in more than
30 years
a surge in demand for electricity has
led to widespread
power cuts across the region and at
least 11 deaths have been blamed on the
widespread storm
the freezing storm has even reached
northern and central parts of
[Music]
mexico
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news